My country is Venezuela and my name is
Jan Rodriguez.
>> My name is Juan and I'm in Karakas in
the capital.
>> My name is Karolina Hill. I live near
the most important military complex here
in Venezuela.
early January 3rd. It was like uh 1:57
a.m. and I was watching a movie with my
sister and everything went completely
dark and 5 seconds later we heard the
first [music] explosion.
I ran to the window to take a look at
what was going on. My hands were
shaking. I could only see the light of
the moon and we could hear the airplanes
and we could hear the helicopters
[music]
but we couldn't see them
and the walls of my [music] building and
the windows were shaking.
I thought now the gringo are here. They
are attacking Karakas.
>> Everybody in the city heard the noises.
I think we were nervous but at the same
time excited because we thought they
[music] were overthrowing the
government. They were freeing us from
the dictatorship. Like my girlfriend and
I were crying and screaming. I called my
mom. I called my brothers. Like I called
all my family. We were waiting for that
for years.
>> When Donald Trump put up the picture
with Maduro
capture, I am so happy in that moment.
Oh my god, man. Honestly, I cry for that
picture. It's finished that this hell.
[music]
This felt like a real victory. Like
someone in this government that has done
so much damage to my country is going to
finally face real justice.
after this attack we were like okay they
did it but what's the meaning of that
what will come for us I mean what what's
the next step [music]
because okay they took mro out but we
have we have padrino lopez we have
Rodriguez I mean they are still here
>> other people government is free I am
confused the future in Venezuela really
really
And the people don't know what [music]
will happen. The people is so scared.
It's so scared. [music]
[music] From the New York Times, I'm
Natalie Kitroof. This is the Daily.
[music]
On Monday, as Nicholas Maduro and his
wife Celia pleaded not guilty in a
Manhattan courtroom, the nearly 30
million people of Venezuela [music]
struggled to absorb the reality of a
post-maduro era. An [music] era in which
the United States appears to be the
dominant force reshaping their once
firmly anti-American government. [music]
Today, my colleague Anatoli Kermanay
explains why President Trump chose to
back a Maduro loyalist to run the
country [music]
and what Venezuelans think of it all.
[music]
It's Tuesday, January 6th.
>> Hi, Anatoli. Welcome. It's good to have
you here.
>> Thanks for having me, Natalie.
So, in the last couple of days, we at
the show have talked about how this
operation to capture Nicholas Maduro
went down. We've talked about the
legality of it. What we haven't talked
about as much is who is running
Venezuela right now and how is all of
that going to play out because that
feels very uncertain in this moment.
You've been in the country as this all
has been going on through the mission
itself. You're in Karacus right now. So,
just to start, how does it feel there?
>> It feels surreal. You know, the city is
still coming out of Christmas holidays.
It's a metropolis of more than 4 million
people and it's full of lights and
decorations. And I was driving through
the city last night and the city was
completely deserted. You know, there was
not a single soul on the streets. Uh, no
sounds to be made. It felt like I was in
a zombie movie. And I think it just sums
up this atmosphere of expectation, of
fear, of concern. It's just tense. We
have not seen mass signs of jubilation
at the fall of Nicholas Maduro. At the
same time, we had not seen any genuine
mass outpourings of grieving for him and
his wife. And this atmosphere of quiet
tension is taking place amid growing
signs of repression, of people being
detained, of journalists being harassed,
which shows to me that even though this
government has a new face, the brutal
repressive apparatus that has kept it in
power for decades remains in place and
is cracking down again. It sounds like
everyone in Venezuela is just kind of
waiting with baited breath for what's to
come. So, let's get into that. And my
first question is, is what we're seeing
actually regime change? Because now that
the dust has settled a little bit, it
seems as though the regime is actually
still in power in Venezuela.
>> That's right, Natalie. The regime is in
place. The people who are no longer here
is Maduro and his wife and around 80
people have died between his Cuban
bodyguards and Venezuelan civilians,
Venezuelan security service members. But
beyond that, we are seeing the same cast
of characters. Most of his inner circle
is intact. It is in power and is led by
Deli Rodriguez, known universally as
Deli, who was Madura's vice president,
who was the first in line to replace him
under any circumstances. So the same
characters uh ruling the country.
>> Okay. So Deli Rodriguez, the vice
president now in power, is someone that
Trump has endorsed. The administration
says they're going to be working
directly with her. And I want to talk
about why. Why her? Because honestly,
when you and I have talked about this,
the most obvious choice for who was
going to work with the Trump
administration in the event that Maduro
was no longer in power was someone else.
It was Maria Karina Machado, this famous
opposition leader. So explain for me,
Anatoli, why it's not Machado and why
it's Deli instead.
>> The short answer is continuity. Trump
wanted to stop the flood of drugs from
Venezuela. He wanted to stop migrants,
but above all, he made it very clear he
wanted Venezuelan oil. And Dela
Rodriguez has been able to sell herself
as a reliable guardian of Venezuela's
oil industry as a person who can manage
Venezuela resources and protect foreign
interests which in this case will be
American investor interests.
>> And Machado was not able to sell herself
as that figure.
>> She was not and this is perhaps the
biggest surprise of this theme. Machado
is by far the most popular politician in
the country. She has led an election
campaign in 2024 that has led more than
70% of Venezuelans to vote for the
opposition and she has won the Nobel
Peace Prize for her efforts. She has
global recognitions and global respect
and she comes with impeccable
conservative credentials. She's a
daughter of a wealthy industrialist. She
has an impeccable record of supporting
free markets, of supporting personal
freedom, supporting Christian faith, all
values at the heart of traditional
Republican agenda. But she's a product
of a different period of American
politics. And Machado's gravest mistake
was not being able to adapt to the
transformation that Trump has brought to
the American right.
>> What do you mean by that exactly? Well,
the adjective that defines Machado more
than anything else is consistency. She
has been extremely consistent in her
beliefs. She has been extremely
consistent her political agenda. And
this consistency is what brought her to
the cost of gaining power in Venezuela
during the last elections. This is the
reasons why she has galvanized
Venezuelan populations because people
believed in her. They believed in her
values. they believed in what she stood
for and that she would defend them, that
she would not negotiate with Madura,
that she would not sell them out. This
consistency was at its core. But in the
current transactional Washington of
today, this has become a liability. she
has not been able to adjust to uh a very
transactional approach to politics that
we see in Washington. A ideologically
agnostic approach to Washington where
beliefs and policies are are ditched and
sacrificed and adjusted on daily basis
to suit the the whims of people taking
power. And this has gradually led her to
lose allies and make a growing number of
enemies in the Trump administration,
which eventually has contributed to her
being sidelined at this crucial moments
in Venezuelan history.
>> Okay. Can you go a little deeper there?
Like give me examples of how she wasn't
able to adjust.
>> So, for example, when Trump returns to
power, his initial focus on Venezuela is
getting Americans detained there, out of
jail, and back into the United States.
and he sends his envoy, he sends a man
called Richard Grenell, a businessman
and former ambassador to Germany to
Caracus to negotiate the deal. And then
Grenell arrives in Karacas. He reaches
out to Machado because she's the
representative of Venezuelan opposition.
She's seen at the time as representative
of American interest. And he starts a
dialogue. That's a relationship that
very quickly goes off rails because
getting Americans out means talking to
Madura's government means negotiating.
Negotiating is an anthema for Maria
Karina Machado. She has argued for
decades that freedom is not negotiable,
that democracy is not negotiable, that
there can be no compromises. And that
set the stage for a train wreck between
Richard Grenell and Maria Karina
Machado. a clash that has repeated
itself over and over throughout the
Trump administration as she lost
national allies and created new enemies.
>> You're saying basically Machado is such
a purist that she's totally opposed to
any notion of negotiating with Maduro
and this alienated Trump's lead
negotiator in Venezuela who's there to
try to get a deal.
>> He was there to try to get a deal and
he's there to get economic deals. to
start negotiating a deal with Maduro's
officials that would see Maduro hand
over Venezuelan resources in return for
him staying in power at least for the
time being. Again, this goes completely
against everything that Machado has
stood for. And over time, in the months
since the election, as Venezuelan
government stepped up repression,
Machado's movement became increasingly
marginalized in Venezuelan political
life.
>> They increasingly had to flee in exile.
Machado herself had to go into hiding.
They [snorts] have gradually lost touch
with what is happening on the streets in
Venezuela and their uncompromising
position meant they had very few
contacts inside Venezuelan government.
So then the Trump administration they
have gradually come to realize that the
strategies that Machado and her aids
were providing to Washington were
outdated were were not accurate and the
intelligence or you know the assumptions
being made by the opposition have proved
wrong time and again and this has
angered officials in the Trump
administration that were trying to work
out a credible plan of getting Maduro
out of power. So it sounds like they
start to sour on her in part because
they don't believe she's giving valuable
intel. And that's despite the fact that
as we know in recent months, Machado was
really doing everything she could to
kind of ingratiate herself with the
Trump administration as they began to
dial up the pressure on Maduro. She even
dedicated her Nobel Peace Prize to
Trump. I guess all that wasn't enough.
>> All that wasn't enough. And to me,
there's a certain tragic element to this
because this is a politician with
impeccable moral credentials. Machado
has built her presidential campaign on
the focus on Venezuelan migrants, of
reuniting Venezuelan families, of
returning the millions of Venezuelans
that have fled the country from Maduro,
bringing them back home. And since Trump
took power, she has stopped talking
about Venezuelan migrants cuz these are
the people that Trump was arresting.
Trump was deporting, Trump was jailing
in in foreign jails where we were
tortured. And Machado stayed silent as
flights into the country were gradually
cancelled under American pressure. She
stayed silent. As inflation rose under
tightening American sanctions,
complicating people's daily life, she
has stayed silent. And this has caused a
political capital inside the country.
She has sacrificed a lot of political
goodwill that she has built inside
Venezuela to please this one man. She
has gone out of her way to praise him.
She has published opads saying that
Trump is the greatest defender of
freedom in the western hemisphere. It
was very clear to everyone observing
Venezuela that Machado is speaking to
the audience of one and her entire
strategy has been on bringing Trump to
her side and so far she has failed.
>> You know, Trump said in this big press
conference he gave over the weekend that
Machado just didn't have the support in
Venezuela. So, was that actually true
based on what you just said? credible
polling in Venezuela is very limited,
but the evidence we have shows that her
popular support has been gradually very
slowly sipping away from a very high
point. Crucially for Trump, when he says
that she doesn't have a respect, he is
talking about respect of the people that
would make it possible for her to
govern. And [snorts] Machado's
inflexibility and focus on pressure
rather than negotiation has meant that
she has lost the support of the Solo's
economic elites that have traditionally
supported the opposition and she has not
been able to gain the support of the
armed forces that she herself has
constantly said are crucial to removing
Maduro. She has again to please Trump
she has gone out of her way to mimic his
talking point that Venezuelan government
is a narco cortel. She has mimicked his
language that Maduro is flooding United
States with drugs and criminals. And
this has meant that for the officers
watching her speeches, for the members
of the governments, for the people that
actually make the state tick and hold
the guns, that she was painting them as
members of an Aarco cartel, as part of a
problem, as people that need to be
eliminated from Venezuela's public life.
and the dissonance between her calls for
the armed forces and government
employees to rise up against Maduro and
the way she has branded them as members
of an ARO cartel ended up spelling her
political downfall inside the Venezuelan
political system.
So, ironically, in order to align
herself with Trump, Machado starts
saying these things that actually
alienate all these elites within
Venezuela that she actually needs to
have on board in order to persuade the
Trump administration that she's a viable
candidate to run the country. Is that
right?
>> That's right. That's exactly what
happened. These are people that have
been in charge for a very long time. And
it the Trump administration became
convinced that to get the country
running quickly to keep it stable, to
keep it from collapsing and sending
hundreds of thousands of migrants to its
borders, to keep the oil flowing to the
United States, to boost that flow of
oil, they needed to work with people who
were already in charge.
And that's why we picked DelC over Maria
Karina Machado.
This is the great irony of a current
political drama that Deli despite of her
Marxist roots, despite being the
handpicked protetéé of a person labeled
as a naroterrorist by the United States,
despite playing a crucial part in the
repressive machine, the White House has
decided that she is the most likely
candidate among the available options to
bring Venezuela into the American sphere
of influence.
We'll be right back.
Okay, let's talk about Venezuela's new
leader, who, as you said, everyone calls
Deli. She sounds like an unlikely choice
for the Trump administration in many
ways to support. explain who she is and
what the Trump administration sees in
her.
>> First and foremost, they see Deli as a
capable economic manager and that
reputation that she has earned has come
at the end of a very unexpected journey.
She is a daughter of a Marxist gerilla
who was tortured by the security forces
of [music] previous pro-American
governments during the cold war. So she
comes from a background of impeccable
socialist credentials but they also come
from money
>> and she enjoyed quite a privileged
upbringing. She went to university in
France and [music]
she joined the government, the current
regime under the wings of her older
brother [music] going up in the ranks of
a chavismo government. And that rise
really accelerated around 2019 when
Venezuela is facing tremendous economic
pressure from United States that had
just sanctions its oil industry. The
revenues have collapsed. [music] The
Maduro government has struggled to just
keep the lights on in the country. And
Maduro turns to Deli and basically tells
her to fix it.
>> And what does she do? Does she fix it?
>> She completely re-engineers Venezuelan
economy. She and a group of technocrats
allied to her began a process that in a
very short period discarded the
socialist [music]
tropes that the government had based its
legitimacy on for many years, price
controls, currency controls, focus on
the needs of Venezuelan poor, and turned
it into [music] a free-for-all market
economy where money ruled and investment
was the only merit.
>> [music]
>> It's so interesting that the daughter of
a Marxist became this trusted steward of
something approaching capitalist reform.
>> Well, in many ways, you know, Venezuela
is an extremely corrupt country and it
is as corrupt today as it was under the
nominally socialist principles. But in
terms of actual policies, Deli has
turned Venezuela into a radically
capitalist society. That there's
practically no regulation, that there
are practically no rules, that money is
the only variable that that governs
society and and governs the interaction
between the states and its citizens.
>> But did it work though? Like did it
stabilize the economy, which is what
Maduro was originally asking for? It did
work and led to a period of moderate
growth. Starting in 2021, the inflation
subsided. People started to open up
businesses. People started to travel
more. The oil production began to
gradually edge up. And remember, Natalie
that this has all started from a very
low base. We're not talking about uh
Dubai of Latin America, but we're
talking about a country that had
suffered a tremendous economic collapse
where millions have fled where that
people have suffered from malnutrition
and it gave them a modiccom of economic
stability.
>> Okay. So, it sounds like the reforms
that Deli helped engineer, they didn't,
you know, bring wealth back on mass to
Venezuelans, but they did write the
economic ship. They helped stanch the
bleeding. Did that do anything to help
the regime's standing with Venezuelans?
I mean, obviously, they still voted for
the opposition in the last election. So,
I would imagine the answer is no, right?
>> The answer is no. And the elections of
2024 have proven that the government had
gone out of its way to sell itself to
Venezuelans as we are stability. The
opposition is chaos. Stick with us. You
can live with us. You can breathe with
us. And still more than 70% of
Venezuelans including massive
proportions of public sector workers and
the poor voted for the opposition voted
for the candidate of Maria Karina
Machado showing just the scale of
exhaustion and repulsion that this
population has against President Maduro.
>> And what about the elites that we talked
about earlier? How do they see Deli in
all of this? Delta's reforms gave him
space to to grow, gave him space to
invest. Again, not talking about massive
investments. We're not talking about
tremendous growth for talking about a
climate where people that have money can
start making more money. And Machado's
message is overhauling this completely,
scrapping this whole system is is
starting from scratch. And business
wants stability and they turn against
Machado's message of radical change.
It's really interesting, right? Because
Machado in many ways is a more natural
ally of theirs too, right? She comes
from this family they probably know,
this industrialist. She has these
impeccable credentials as a free market
capitalist. And yet here she's the one
with the broad-based popular support
who's lost the support of these elites.
While Deli doesn't have that popular
support, it sounds like, but she has one
over this group of business titans that
is still incredibly influential in this
country.
>> This is a fundamental paradox, Natalie.
I could not have summarized it better.
Uh, and I think all it just goes to show
that economic freedoms do not always
correlate with political freedoms. And
the reality is that for Trump, what
matters to him is the deals and the
investment of the elites. And that has
led him to gradually ally with Deli, the
the self-styled technocrat who could
bring him Venezuelan riches over Maria
Kurim Machado who was promising
political liberation but a very volatile
and unstable economic environment. Okay,
so now I think I get why Deli is
preferable to Machado in the eyes of
Trump. What I still don't understand
though is why Deli is preferable to
Maduro because you've told us Anatoli
the few times that you've come on to
talk about this that Maduro was actually
happy to let the US into Venezuela's oil
fields to give up those natural
resources as part of a potential deal
with Trump. Why did Trump reject that
only to go for what sounds like a very
similar deal with Deli?
>> I don't think we have perfect clarity to
that question at the moment, Natalie. My
hunch is that the campaign against
Maduro, the campaign to brand a narot
terrorist and a cartel chief who is at
war with the United States has gone
simply too far for Trump to tolerate him
and make a deal with him. Remember that
while oil is the driving force of
Trump's policy towards Minnesota, it's
not the only one, right? And there are
advisers within his administration,
there are people in in his
administration that are pushing towards
our goals. Uh there's Steven Miller with
his focus on migration and uh illegal
drugs. There's Secretary of State Marco
Rubio who has been a declared
anti-communist warrior. These people
have been sworn enemies of Maduro. And
as Maduro repeatedly rebuffs Trump
administration's attempts to provide him
a soft lensing, to provide him a golden
parachute, Trump's position hardens and
by December his patience finally snaps.
Maduro's response to increasingly
explicit ultimatums from America was to
present himself as a carefree patier.
He constantly dances on television.
>> He sings no crazy war.
>> You know, he's he's a good dancer. You
know, he he puts up the moves and you
know, he does on regular basis [music]
>> and at some point Trump snaps.
Wait, are you saying Anatoli that Maduro
dancing on national television is an
actual factor here in everything that
ends up happening?
>> My understanding it was the stroll that
broke the camel's back.
>> Meaning what exactly? That Trump saw
Maduro dancing and said, "This guy's not
taking me seriously." Or what? meaning
that Trump saw the ongoing dancing as a
humiliation as Maduro calling Trump's
bluff as Maduro telling Trump I'm here
and I'm here for as long as I want to be
and Trump could not tolerate what he saw
as a personal affront.
>> Wow. We are truly living in wild times.
>> Remember I mean Natalie, history is
often made by seemingly sort of small
banal circumstances, right? It's a
accumulation of major factors, major
forces like oil, migration, drugs. But
you know, it can be something as sort of
small as a little techno dance on a
public stage that can tilt the scares
towards a momentous policy decision that
will change the history of Western
Hemisphere perhaps forever. Okay, we'll
have plenty of time to talk about that
future, but for now, the Trump
administration is counting on Deli. And
this is someone who in the last few days
has come out very strongly against them.
It's worth saying. She said Maduro is
the only president of Venezuela. She
refers to herself as the vice president.
And I'm wondering what we should make of
that. I know that there are a lot of
people from the regime that are still in
power in the country and I wonder if
this is her playing to them to that
domestic audience. She has to appease
them. Right.
>> That's right. Remember that the attack
was a major humiliation to the armed
forces and security officials that form
the core of Maduro's regime. It was an
operation that cost the life of 80
people uh causing major destructions in
capital Karacas. Deli could not just
sort of wave this off and open her arms
to Americans. You know, she has to
satisfy the domestic audience. She has
to show to the ruling parties faithful
who are not numerous in numbers but who
hold a lot of guns that she's not an
American porn that she's someone who
will defend the country's sovereignty
someone who will defend the the
country's standing while at the same
time she has to satisfy American
demands. You know the Trump
administration and his officials have
repeatedly stated that Deli must do
their bidding or else she will face the
same fate as Maduro. So she's trying to
play for both audiences and as you said
she started off making very sort of
aggressive remarks towards America but
just in a matter of days in a matter of
hours her position has softened. She has
issued a statement calling for
corporations with the United States for
peaceful coexistence for working
together for joint business ventures and
just let it sink for you Natalie. This
is a statement towards the government
that has just blown up your capital and
killed 80 people living in the capital
and you are basically opening your arms
to their investments and to bilateral
relations.
>> No, it's totally remarkable and it makes
me want to ask you about what this means
for the Chavista movement that has been
in power now for almost three decades in
Venezuela. This is a movement that has
staked its legacy on being an
anti-American bull work. What happens to
that legacy if Deli follows through and
really does become a willing partner of
the Trump administration?
>> To me, Natalie, the events of the past
few days exposed the hollowess of the
nationalist
rhetoric behind the Chavisma movement.
At the time when the country came under
the attack, no one was prepared to
defend President Maduro. There was no
notable resistance from Yam forces. And
to me, this peels another layer of
mysticism and ideology from the
movements that over the years, over the
decades, this movement has gradually
lost the the pillars of its ideology.
First it lost the populist support, then
it lost the socialist credentials. Now
it loses nationalism. And what is laugh
Natalie? Survival. Survival is the core
aspects of chisbo movements. And the
senior officials who have been at
Maduro's side for years and have now
closing ranks behind LC are focused on
survival at any cost.
>> And at I want to end by just asking how
the Venezuelans you're talking to are
perceiving all of this, how they're
feeling right now. I have to imagine
that the many people who voted against
Maduro are happy that he's gone on the
one hand and yet the regime that he led
is still very much there. And not only
that, now there's also this added
element of Trump having a potentially
very heavy hand in their country. So how
is that playing with people? This is a
country that has gotten used to
disappointments, that has gotten used to
tragedy. In the years that I have lived
here, I have experienced time and again
a moment of extreme exaltation when it
appeared that freedom and democracy were
just within grasp. You know, I have
witnessed millions of people come out on
the streets in popular protest against
the government. And every time that
hope, that democracy, that freedom was
snatched from under their nose. [music]
This is a country that has been burned
many times and where people have learned
to temper their expectations. And I
think most people in Venezuela when they
watched ElC being sworn in as the
country's interim president, this is not
the outcome they would have hoped for.
This is not the outcome they would have
chosen. This is an outcome that is not
just, but is not fair, but is an outcome
that just might make [music] their
difficult life just a little bit easier.
>> [music]
>> Well, Anatoli, I hope you get some rest
in the coming days and thank you so
much.
>> Thanks for having me. [music]
>> On Monday, in her first interview since
the capture of Maduro, [music] Maria
Karina Machado told Fox's Shan Hannity
that she hadn't spoken with President
Trump since the US deposed the
Venezuelan leader. But I do want to say
today on behalf of the Venezuelan people
how grateful we are for his [music]
courage.
>> She also thanked Trump for the quote
courageous actions that led to Maduro's
removal.
>> It's a milestone and it's not only huge
for the Venezuelan people on our future.
I think it's a huge step [music] for
humanity, for freedom and human dignity.
We'll be right back. Here's
what else you need to know today. On
Monday, Defense Secretary Pete Hgsith
[music]
said the military had begun
administrative actions against Mark
Kelly, [music] the Democratic senator
from Arizona, a move that could end up
reducing Kelly's rank and the military
pension he receives as a retired Navy
captain.
The review stems from a video that Kelly
and five other Democratic lawmakers
released in November [music] that
reminded service members they were
obligated to refuse illegal orders.
Hexath called the video sedicious and
called Kelly [music] reckless for trying
to undermine discipline in the ranks.
Kelly and his lawyers have argued the
senator was simply articulating a
fundamental principle of military law.
They've also [music] pointed out that
Hegathth himself has made similar
comments in the past.
[music] Today's episode was produced by
Olivia Nat, Rob Zipco, Relle Bonja, and
Claire Tennis with help from Carlos
Prito. It was edited by Paige Cowat
[music] and Liz O Balin. Contains music
by Marian Lozano, Pat McCusker, and
Rowan Neist. [music] and was engineered
by Chris Wood. Special thanks to Isayen
Herrera, Annie Coral, Maria [music]
Victoria Fermine, and Adriana Fernandez.
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
[music] Kitroth. See you tomorrow.